java questions
Java Platform
1 . Why is Java so popular?
java is so popular beacuse of platform independence,meaing java can runon any computer with anyarchitecture.java runs on any computer with java runtime environment JRE.
2 . What is platform independence?
it means it can run on any platform .after compilation.
steps
javac compiles the code and converts into class file which is byte code and not the machine code native.
The byte code genearted is a non-excututable code and needs to be interpreter to exceute and thus the byte code is executed by the JVM.
3 . What is bytecode?
byte code is a form of code which is designed for efficient excecutionof by a software interpreter
4 . Compare JDK vs JVM vs JRE
JVM:java virtual machine is a  abstract class. it deosnt exist physically. it is a runtime environment in which  a java byte code which can be executed
main tasks of jvm:loads code
verifies code
excetues code
provides runtime environment
JRE
it means java runtime environment.it is a set of software tools which are used for developing java applications,it contains libraries and other files that jvm uses at runtime.
JDK
it is short form for java developemnt kit.It is a software development environment which is used to develop applications and applets. it contains jre jvm and development tools like javac.
5 . What are the important differences between C++ and Java?
plat form dependent plat form idenpendent.doesnt support threads supports threads
6 . What is the role for a classloader in Java?
class loader in java is a part of runtime environment which dynamically loads classes into java virtual machine.not all at once but when ever required.
Wrapper Classes
7 . What are Wrapper classes?
it contains primitive data types, we can wrap primitive data types into a wrapper class
8 . Why do we need Wrapper classes in Java?
to convert simple data types into objects and to give object from to a data type
to convert strings into data types
9 . What are the different ways of creating Wrapper class instances?
10 . What are differences in the two ways of creating Wrapper classes?
11 . What is auto boxing?
converting primitive value into a object of wrapper class
12 . What are the advantages of auto boxing?
no need for convertiuon hence less code is required.
13 . What is casting?
assigning value of a primitive data tyep to another.
14 . What is implicit casting?
it means casting into compatible operators. such as int to double.
15 . What is explicit casting?
this requires converting the type of the incompatible types such as converting float to int or string.
Strings
15.5 .what is immutable?
immutable means once the constructor for an object is completed execution that instace cant be altered.
a immutable class is a class which cant be altered after creation
these are thread safe.
16 . Are all String’s immutable?
yes by default String is immutable
17 . Where are String values stored in memory?
they are stored in the heap memory
17.5 .what is heap memory?
heap memory a storage in ram where it is allocated dynamically and is larger. this memory is needs to freed to avoid mamory leaks
18 . Why should you be careful about String concatenation(+) operator in loops?
since string is immutabel everytime you concatinate then it create a new string in the heap memory
19 . How do you solve above problem?
20 . What are differences between String and StringBuffer?
strings are stored in string pool ins java heap.string buffer is directely stored in heap and is mutable
strings are thread safe stringbuffer are not thread safe
string access is fast but strig buffer access is slow
string buffer is a special class which is mutable and has more functionality such as insert delete replace etc
21 . What are differences between StringBuilder and StringBuffer?
both of these are alternatives to string in mutable way but with one difference.
string builder provides no gurantee for synchronization where as string buffer does.
string builder stored the characters by using serialicaiton.
21.2what is thread safe?
it means that only one thread can access the data at one time.
22 . Can you give examples of different utility methods in String class?
concatenate substring concatenate replace delete
Object oriented programming basics
23 . What is a class?
24 . What is an object?
25 . What is state of an object?
state of a n object tells the type and value of the object
26 . What is behavior of an object?
behaviour of an object tells how the operations can be performed on the object
27 . What is the super class of every class in Java?
super is keyword is a reference vriable that is used to refer to parent class objects
28 . Explain about toString method ?
to string meathod converts the values such as integer to string
29 . What is the use of equals method in Java?
eqauls meathod check the type and also the value.
30 . What are the important things to consider when implementing equals method?
generally used for objects
31 . What is the Hashcode method used for in Java?
hash code is a number or a key which is calculated and stored when you insert a value into hash set hast map or hashtable.this vaule is used to retrieve the values quickly
32 . Explain inheritance with examples .
33 . What is method overloading?
this helps same functions names to have differnet signatures
34 . What is method overriding?
subclass with meathod same meathd name and same signatures but having different logics
35 . Can super class reference variable can hold an object of sub class?
no because subclass can have more fuctionality than super class
36 . Is multiple inheritance allowed in Java?
no to reduce complexity
37 . What is an interface?
it is kind of a blue print for the class. the iterface is firs defined which contains the fuctions.these functions when inmplemanted by the class needs to be used in the class untill java 7 after java 7 only default classes needs to be used.
38 . How do you define an interface?

39 . How do you implement an interface?
implents
40 . Can you explain a few tricky things about interfaces?
41 . Can you extend an interface?
yes we can extend an interface.
42 . Can a class extend multiple interfaces?
no a class cannot extend multiple interfaces
43 . What is an abstract class?
abstract class is a class which contains meathods but no implementation this class can be extended by an other class and defined there.
44 . When do you use an abstract class?
you expect that classes that extend you calsses have common meathods and need to have access modifiers other than public
45 . How do you define an abstract method?
abstract void meathod name
46 . Compare abstract class vs interface?
abstract class is used when closely nit classes need to use the abstract fuctions.
interfaces can be used by multiple classes and need to have blue prnt of the class.take advantage of multiple inheraitance. any class can implemnt you r interface.
47 . What is a constructor?
it is a default meathod which is called when calling a object
48 . What is a default constructor?
deafult constructor is a constructor whcihc has not variables
49 . Will this code compile?
50 . How do you call a super class constructor from a constructor?
51 . Will this code compile?
52 . What is the use of this()?
53 . Can a constructor be called directly from a method?
54 . Is a super class constructor called even when there is no explicit call from a sub class constructor?
Advanced object oriented concepts
55 . What is polymorphism?
it means the output can be diplayed in multiple ways
56 . What is the use of instanceof operator in Java?
57 . What is coupling?
it means that one class depends on the implentation of the other class
loose coupling means its a cahin of cl=oupling in which the couple is not directyly influenced by the other class
58 . What is cohesion?
59 . What is encapsulation?
it means wrapping up of data under singlw unit. it means that data variables re hidden from other classes onyl variables are used in the same class and they are public
60 . What is an inner class?
61 . What is a static inner class?
62 . Can you create an inner class inside a method?
63 . What is an anonymous class?
Modifiers
64 . What is default class modifier?
65 . What is private access modifier?
66 . What is default or package access modifier?
67 . What is protected access modifier?
68 . What is public access modifier?
public vs private vs protected
public access everywhere
private only the class it is used baclically a local varible.
protected can be used in class and subclass and package
69 . What access types of variables can be accessed from a class in same package?
70 . What access types of variables can be accessed from a class in different package?
71 . What access types of variables can be accessed from a sub class in same package?
72 . What access types of variables can be accessed from a sub class in different package?
73 . What is the use of a final modifier on a class?
74 . What is the use of a final modifier on a method?
75 . What is a final variable?
it can only be initialized once and cannot be modified
76 . What is a final argument?
77 . What happens when a variable is marked as volatile?
78 . What is a static variable?
conditions & loops
79 . Why should you always use blocks around if statement?
80 . Guess the output
81 . Guess the output
82 . Guess the output of this switch block .
83 . Guess the output of this switch block?
84 . Should default be the last case in a switch statement?
85 . Can a switch statement be used around a String
86 . Guess the output of this for loop
87 . What is an enhanced for loop?
88 . What is the output of the for loop below?
89 . What is the output of the program below?
90 . What is the output of the program below?
Exception handling
91 . Why is exception handling important?
92 . What design pattern is used to implement exception handling features in most languages?
93 . What is the need for finally block?
94 . In what scenarios is code in finally not executed?
in every senario finally block is excecuted
95 . Will finally be executed in the program below?
96 . Is try without a catch is allowed?
not recommended
97 . Is try without catch and finally allowed?
without finally allowed
98 . Can you explain the hierarchy of exception handling classes?
try- exception io exception etc are expected exception other exceptions are runtime exceptions which are unchecked like divide by 0 null pointer exception
99 . What is the difference between error and exception?
error is a unforseen senario like or abnormal behavior like thread killed etc. these are not caught.
100 . What is the difference between checked exceptions and unchecked exceptions?
checked exceptions are exceptions are exceptions whcih occour at compile time and inchecked exceptiona re exceptiona re exceptions which occour at runtime.
101 . How do you throw an exception from a method?
using throw  like expty stack exception
102 . What happens when you throw a checked exception from a method?
catch meathod cathed it and logs it
103 . What are the options you have to eliminate compilation errors when handling checked exceptions?

104 . How do you create a custom exception?
in the catch exception we declare a new exceptiojn wchihc the cndition and throw it
105 . How do you handle multiple exception types with same exception handling block?
using pipe
106 . Can you explain about try with resources?
it is basically the use of file output strea or input stream with a file resource
it also ensures that the resource which is opened is closed at the end of try block
107 . How does try with resources work?

108 . Can you explain a few exception handling best practices?
Miscellaneous topics
109 . What are the default values in an array?
dependig on the type of the value array is initilized the compiler return not garbage value like 0 for int null for string
110 . How do you loop around an array using enhanced for loop?
for String element: array
    loops all values in array
111 . How do you print the content of an array?
usinf tostring of array
using arrays.aslist
using loops
112 . How do you compare two arrays?
using equals function
cant be used for arrays in arrays
for the above use deepequals
113 . What is an enum?
enum is used to represent a group of named constant like colors
and it is used similar to a class and can be called
114 . Can you use a switch statement around an enum?
yes switch can be used in swicth case
115 . What are variable arguments or varargs?
varargs are maily used in function to allow zero values
116 . What are asserts used for?
asserts are like checks which need not be satified to run the code .
like assert value > 20 but int value is only 15 and we print the value then we get 15 as out put but if we run using eableassertations then we get error.
it is generally used for checking logical mishaps
117 . When should asserts be used?
118 . What is garbage collection?
garbage collection is a way of releasing free space in meory .
119 . Can you explain garbage collection with an example?
120 . When is garbage collection run?
deamon thread is run in the background with low prioty and is collectng garbage
eden space new heap
s0 next new spcae
s1 next next new spacve
tenured or old geneartion are here
permanent for classes
121 . What are best practices on garbage collection?
best way id to set heap size and flasgs for garbage collection in jVM
122 . What are initialization blocks?
123 . What is a static initializer?
124 . What is an instance initializer block?
125 . What is tokenizing?
it is a process of spliting the data into multiple subparts like string tokenizer which splits the tockes itno multiple parts
126 . Can you give an example of tokenizing?
string tokenization
127 . What is serialization?
it is a process of converting object into byte stream
main adjavtage of this is to save the state and also persist the object along the network
128 . How do you serialize an object using serializable interface?
we use write object meathod and pass the object in it
129 . How do you de-serialize in Java?
read object is used to deserialize the object
130 . What do you do if only parts of the object have to be serialized?
we use part of the object using the getter
131 . How do you serialize a hierarchy of objects?
we implement the super class with serializable and then extentend the subclass with the serializethen both get serilized
132 . Are the constructors in an object invoked when it is de-serialized?
133 . Are the values of static variables stored when an object is serialized?
Collections
134 . Why do we need collections in Java?
it is a group of objects represented as single object
135 . What are the important interfaces in the collection hierarchy?
collection
set-hashset  linkedhashset
sortedset-treeset
list-arraylist,linkedlist,vector
map-hastmap,linkedhasdmap,hashtable
sortedmap-treemap

136 . What are the important methods that are declared in the collection interface?
137 . Can you explain briefly about the List interface?
138 . Explain about ArrayList with an example?
it uses dynamic arrarys to store data and it best for retreival but slow in insertion
139 . Can an ArrayList have duplicate elements?
yes
140 . How do you iterate around an ArrayList using iterator?
4 meathods
generic for loop
advanced for loop int i: allaylist
while size >count
iterator iterator iter- arrlist.iterator
iter.hasnext

141 . How do you sort an ArrayList?
collections.sort in instance of arraylist
142 . How do you sort elements in an ArrayList using comparable interface?
we can use create a funtion to compare the vaslues
143 . How do you sort elements in an ArrayList using comparator interface?
use compareto function for comporator
144 . What is vector class? How is it different from an ArrayList?
vector class is a growing list of array and it can have multiple data types.
both array list and vectros are same but vectros are syncronized and array list is not . vectror class uses more memory which array list uses lesser size
145 . What is linkedList? What interfaces does it implement? How is it different from an ArrayList?
list interface implements it. it is doubly list list it can be used as list or queue.
it is easir to push and pop but daata retrieval is slow
array list data retreival is fast
146 . Can you briefly explain about the Set interface?
a set interface is a collection which cannot duplicate elements
allows equals and hashcode

147 . What are the important interfaces related to the Set interface?
sorted and normal
148 . What is the difference between Set and sortedSet interfaces?

sorted set arranges the elements in assending order while unsorted set doesnt
149 . Can you give examples of classes that implement the Set interface?
hastest linked hashset treeset
150 . What is a HashSet?
it is a set which uses hashcode and doent gurantee the order of the insertion
it is serlizable and clonable no duplicates
151 . What is a linkedHashSet? How is different from a HashSet?
it is a set which uses linked hasmap and maintaines the order of insertionit a avrage performer
insertion and deletion are fast
hashset is the fastest to read with no order
152 . What is a TreeSet? How is different from a HashSet?
treeset is a sorted set with assending order when comperator is not given.
least performance as it uses comperator to order the values
153 . Can you give examples of implementations of navigableSet?
it is sorted set interface, which ca order in reverse order as well
154 . Explain briefly about Queue interface?
queue interface is a queue with first in firout policy
155 . What are the important interfaces related to the Queue interface?
priority queue
blocking queue
deque
156 . Explain about the Deque interface?
it is a double ended queue which is fifo or lifo
it is faster than stack and linked list
157 . Explain the BlockingQueue interface?
it is mainly used whie threading it can only be used while by one thread at a time when it is at full or nill capacity.it uses lifo
158 . What is a priorityQueue?
it is a queue which uses fifo but when uses comperator to set the priority based on a function . then the values are procesed . it is not stuible for threading.
159 . Can you give example implementations of the BlockingQueue interface?

160 . Can you briefly explain about the Map interface?
map interface uses key value apirs to store values
161 . What is difference between Map and sortedMap?
sorted map sorts the values based on natural order of the keys while the map doesnt.
162 . What is a HashMap?
it is map which doesnt allow duplicate keys and is fast becsues of hashing it is not orderred
163 . What are the different methods in a Hash Map?
is empty putall remove foreach replce etc
164 . What is a TreeMap? How is different from a HashMap?
tree map is a sorted map which sorts the values based on the keys.
hash allows null tree doent as it has to sort it less performance
165 . Can you give an example of implementation of navigableMap interface?

166 . What are the static methods present in the collections class?
Advanced collections
167 . What is the difference between synchronized and concurrent collections in Java?
ynchronized collection can be accesssed by only one thread at a time while concurrent colleciton can be used by multiple colecitons ex hashset hasmap priority queue and all sorted list and sets
168 . Explain about the new concurrent collections in Java?

169 . Explain about copyonwrite concurrent collections approach?
every change done in the colleciton incurs a news cloned collection
170 . What is compareandswap approach?

171 . What is a lock? How is it different from using synchronized approach?
locking is also a way of synchronization between threads. it locks the acces to the data and then syncronized.
172 . What is initial capacity of a Java collection?
no deafult value like vector 10 array list 10 but in java 8 it can be empty
173 . What is load factor?
it decides when to increase the size fo the collection .
174 . When does a Java collection throw UnsupportedOperationException?
the requested operaion is not supported
175 . What is difference between fail-safe and fail-fast iterators?
fail safethey operate on clone of the collection
fail fast they operate on the collection it self and throw error when the value concurrecnt opreation is going on
176 . What are atomic operations in Java?
atomic operations are operations which look like simple operations but have multiple steps and lead to inconsistancy when multiple threads are accssing the values repeatedly.
177 . What is BlockingQueue in Java?
Generics
178 . What are Generics?
the vaules beteen <> in hasmap this actually is using data types to be used as types for maps
179 . Why do we need Generics? Can you give an example of how Generics make a program more flexible?
180 . How do you declare a generic class?
181 . What are the restrictions in using generic type that is declared in a class declaration?
182 . How can we restrict Generics to a subclass of particular class?
183 . How can we restrict Generics to a super class of particular class?
184 . Can you give an example of a generic method?
Multi threading
185 . What is the need for threads in Java?
it uses multple threads provided by cpu to speed up the process.
186 . How do you create a thread?
extend thread
provide run meadhod and start the thread
187 . How do you create a thread by extending thread class?
188 . How do you create a thread by implementing runnable interface?
189 . How do you run a thread in Java?
.start
190 . What are the different states of a thread?
new runnable blocked waiting thread waiting terminated
191 . What is priority of a thread? How do you change the priority of a thread?
thread with higher pripority exceute fist while the thread with lowes priority executes last
.setpriority
192 . What is executorservice?
executer service is a service which is uesed to run the code asynchornously.this is especially use for with ui and data retreival
193 . Can you give an example for executorservice?
194 . Explain different ways of creating executor services .
195 . How do you check whether an executionservice task executed successfully?
196 . What is callable? How do you execute a callable from executionservice?
callable statement is a better version of runnable where the thread can returna value and also check for checked exception
197 . What is synchronization of threads?
this means that the data accessed by the threads needs to be syncronized as other threads might have manupulated the data
198 . Can you give an example of a synchronized block?
it is used to synchronize only particulat parts of the code.
199 . Can a static method be synchronized?
200 . What is the use of join method in threads?
201 . Describe a few other important methods in threads?
202 . What is a deadlock?
dead lock occurs when multiple threads try to access the same reqources but the first reaource needs the second reaource to complte the task
203 . What are the important methods in Java for inter-thread communication?
wait notify and notify all
204 . What is the use of wait method?
a thread calls wait to wait for the resource to be available
205 . What is the use of notify method?
notify meathod notifies the thread which called wait to come and fetch resource
206 . What is the use of notifyall method?
wakes up all the threads that called the wait opration
207 . Can you write a synchronized program with wait and notify methods?
Functional Programming - Lamdba expressions and Streams
208 . What is functional programming?
209 . Can you give an example of functional programming?
210 . What is a stream?
it is a new package in java 8 whcih is used to perform aggreate filter foreach etc operations on collections.
211 . Explain about streams with an example?
what are intermediate operations in streams?
212 . What are terminal operations in streams?
213 . What are method references?
214 . What are lambda expressions?
it only implements only abstract classes and is used for with interfaces with only one function.
ex: int of x -> 2*x  here of int x is function with values int x and 2*x is the body.
215 . Can you give an example of lambda expression?
216 . Can you explain the relationship between lambda expression and functional interfaces?
217 . What is a predicate?
predicate is just a boolean with lambda as a fuction.
218 . What is the functional interface - function?
219 . What is a consumer?
220 . Can you give examples of functional interfaces with multiple arguments?
New Features
221 . What are the new features in Java 5?
222 . What are the new features in Java 6?
223 . What are the new features in Java 7?
strings in switch
handling multiple exceptions for same tryusing pipe
@safevarargs annotation
224 . What are the new features in Java 8?
foreach meathod in iterator
interfaces have deafult and static meathods
java time api for time
java stream api
